[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. In recent years, we've seen the rise of populist authoritarians
[Amit Varma]: across the world. Trump in the US, Erdogan in Turkey, Orban in Hungary, Modi in India.
[Amit Varma]: What do they have in common? Well, the author Jean-Werner Muller wrote a book a couple of
[Amit Varma]: years ago where he pointed out a number of things that populists tend to have in common.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a column on the book for the Times of India, which is linked on the page for
[Amit Varma]: this episode. One of the things he pointed out is that populists tend to try and consolidate
[Amit Varma]: their power by undermining the rules and institutions that otherwise act as a check on them. These
[Amit Varma]: rules and institutions are the subject of our show today. My guest on the show is Amaya
[Amit Varma]: Naik, who is a lawyer and policy analyst, a graduate of the Fletcher School of Law and
[Amit Varma]: Diplomacy and a former research scholar of the Takshashila Institution. He also writes
[Amit Varma]: regularly for the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com and is one expert in foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy I have a lot of time for. But before I get to my conversation with him, let's take
[Amit Varma]: a quick commercial break. Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really
[Amit Varma]: afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no
[Amit Varma]: more. Head on over to Indiancolors.com. Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of
[Amit Varma]: the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India and adapts them into objects
[Amit Varma]: of everyday use. These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion
[Amit Varma]: covers and table runners, and accessories like tote bags. This allows art lovers to
[Amit Varma]: actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price. And artists get royalties
[Amit Varma]: on sales just like authors do. What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of
[Amit Varma]: new products including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters
[Amit Varma]: made of mango wood. Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Wazvoo x Wazvoo,
[Amit Varma]: Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders
[Amit Varma]: for corporate and festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a
[Amit Varma]: friend, head on over to Indiancolors.com. That's colors with an OU. And if you want
[Amit Varma]: a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20. That's IVM for IVM podcast. IVM20 for a 20% discount
[Amit Varma]: at Indiancolors.com. Ameya, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi Amit, it's good to be here. Ameya, if you know if you ask young kids at
[Amit Varma]: the age of 10, what do you want to be when you grow up and they'll say all kinds of things,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they want to be astronauts or they want to be rock stars or they want to be even
[Amit Varma]: engineers or doctors if they're too influenced by their parents. Very few people kids say
[Amit Varma]: hey, I want to grow up and be a policy analyst and I want to specialize in international
[Amit Varma]: relations. How did you get into all this? So if you asked me at 10, I'm guessing my
[Guest]: answer would have been something like I want to be a lawyer. And you are a lawyer. And
[Guest]: I did I did go to law school. I'm a lapsed lawyer. I've never practiced in part because
[Guest]: the kind of law I specialize in is public international law, which means not people
[Guest]: but states are parties. I guess I read a lot of like, it's like thrillers, but more about
[Guest]: negotiation and diplomacy than about spies and shooting. That was one part of it. So
[Guest]: like not John le Carre, but Morgenthau. Yeah, there's fiction to be had in the diplomacy
[Guest]: space as well. I did a bunch of like debates and model UNs and things in school and I remember
[Guest]: just being you know, the experience of playing diplomat for a day was fascinating enough
[Guest]: that I was like, this might be what I actually want to do with my life. In India, that's
[Guest]: not necessarily the easiest thing to do because you sort of have exactly one professional
[Guest]: path, which is get into the foreign services. And so I sort of spent college and law school
[Guest]: trying to do that and didn't quite make it and then had to look around and be like, okay,
[Guest]: so now if I want to study this professionally and find other ways and other places to do
[Guest]: it, how do I go about that? And you know, that's where an international law focus and
[Guest]: sort of policy analysis of the field grows in.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when you started studying, say, international relations and international
[Amit Varma]: law and so on and so forth, and you look through the last from the time India has been independent
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, what are the kind of coherent themes or strands that emerge?
[Guest]: Well, especially given the episode we're going to do this, there's obviously a strand around
[Guest]: the development of a liberal institutional order, especially post World War Two, you
[Guest]: really can't escape nuclear non proliferation and disarmament as a theme. And it's a big
[Guest]: one both in its successes and its failures. You know, if you want the jargon term for
[Guest]: it hegemonic transition is the third one. So how the US rises from the ashes of the
[Guest]: British Empire. Superbook, you can read about this, by the way, it's called Safe Passage
[Guest]: by Corey Shawkey on precisely the peaceful transition of power from the British to the
[Guest]: United States peaceful within quarts because you know, World Wars, and now potentially
[Guest]: with China rising, what might the next hegemonic transition look like?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what we're talking about, obviously, is a sort of in a sense impelled by the rise
[Amit Varma]: of authoritarian leaders, like Trump and Orban and Erdogan, and to some extent, Modi and
[Amit Varma]: I'd once written a column last year about populism, which looked at John Werner Muller's
[Amit Varma]: book about populism, and he identified seven or eight things that populist leaders had
[Amit Varma]: in common. And one of them, which all of these people we named have have in common is that
[Amit Varma]: they immediately start attacking and eroding institutions. And it's almost as if you know,
[Amit Varma]: guys like Trump believe that democracy is all about elections. And that's it, you win
[Amit Varma]: that particular beauty contest, and you're king for five years and nothing else matters.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, democracy is a lot more than that, as much as the act of the people expressing
[Amit Varma]: themselves through voting. It's the you know, the rules and institutions matter a great
[Amit Varma]: deal. Why is that? How did this understanding evolved at rules and institutions matter?
[Amit Varma]: How do we design a system of government?
[Guest]: It's a great question. First of all, you're absolutely right that democracy is a lot more
[Guest]: than just voting. Voting is a lot more than just voting. There's a whole bunch of systems
[Guest]: around on, you know, who gets to vote and how much each vote counts for and how the
[Guest]: votes are counted.
[Guest]: Public choice theory.
[Guest]: Whether it's machines doing them or humans and so on and so forth. None of those are
[Guest]: trivial decisions. But zoom out to sort of the big philosophical question, right? In
[Guest]: a sense, what you're asking is, do we need governments? And why do we need them? And
[Guest]: I would say, yes, we need them. And we need them because there are a set of problems that
[Guest]: individuals acting in their own best self interest, unfortunately, are not able to solve.
[Amit Varma]: I think we all kind of agree that we need them. But then the question is, how do they
[Amit Varma]: evolve? And how can they be designed?
[Guest]: You know, if you take as a given that basically, the goal of a government is to solve collective
[Guest]: action problems, right? It's to solve situations where each individual person finds themselves
[Guest]: in what you know, what game theory would call a prisoner's dilemma. If everybody cooperates,
[Guest]: you're going to do better. But really, you have a higher payoff right now for defecting
[Guest]: rather than cooperating. So again, phenomenal book you can read. This one's old. It's by
[Guest]: Robert Axelrod. It's called the evolution of cooperation.
[Amit Varma]: Evolution of cooperation. One of my favorite books and one of my recent guests, Matt Ridley
[Amit Varma]: talks about as well. And Ridley, in fact, was I did a recent episode with him where
[Amit Varma]: he was talking about the evolution of government. And he said that all governments or the state
[Amit Varma]: essentially first began as a protection racket. And then they evolved to other things. So
[Amit Varma]: what you're talking about, you know, all this collective action and looking after rights
[Amit Varma]: as classical liberals would say and all that is kind of post facto rationalizations. It
[Amit Varma]: begin as protection rackets. And then we've, you know, figured out how do we rationalize
[Amit Varma]: it and then how do we bring it under control? I mean, one of the great dilemmas of any society
[Amit Varma]: is that you want the government to serve the society instead of the other way around.
[Guest]: That's exactly right. So this is a famous school in political science and political
[Guest]: theory, right? Best developed by Charles Tilley in politics and Mancur Olson in economics.
[Guest]: Tilley's essay is famously war making and state making as organized crime. And it's
[Guest]: right. It's sort of the function that it served was, hey, I'm a feudal lord. I'm going to
[Guest]: stop other feudal lords from raising you. And Olson's book, in fact, was called Stationery
[Guest]: Bandits. Exactly. But let's make a distinction here between sort of the historical reason
[Guest]: that governments evolve. Absolutely. And the theoretical function that rules or institutions
[Guest]: serve, right? And so on the latter on the on the theoretical function that they serve,
[Guest]: it is precisely that if you let the guy in power do whatever he or she wants, then that
[Guest]: person is going to do things that are good for them and not necessarily for the people
[Guest]: in whose interest they are supposed to be acting. And the reason that Axelrod's work
[Guest]: is just so defining of the field is because he shows that if you actually play out that
[Guest]: game and by the way, he did this by mailing a version of that game to a bunch of people
[Guest]: and asking them to play it. There is a clear superior strategy that emerges. That strategy
[Guest]: is what he calls nice tit for tat. Right? Start by assuming the other guy will play
[Guest]: by the rules. If they don't punish them as you go on punishing them, that sort of devolves
[Guest]: into a situation where clearly you're not able to work together. If they do continue
[Guest]: cooperating and as that builds up, it goes beyond the point where you're just building
[Guest]: trust between those two people related to that interaction. That trust itself becomes
[Guest]: a valuable commodity that can be used to do other things.
[Amit Varma]: And if I remember correctly, he termed it reciprocal altruism.
[Guest]: Exactly. Right. He's, I mean, the piece of this that I find most fascinating, right,
[Guest]: is at some point of time after you've had the good experience of somebody abiding by
[Guest]: the rules for a number of turns, two things happen. One, those rules themselves take on
[Guest]: a sort of existence of their own. Right? This is famous experiment. It's been done on the
[Guest]: negative side, but it is famous experiment of like five monkeys in a cage and every time
[Guest]: they try to walk towards the ladder in the middle that leads up to the fruits, they get
[Guest]: doused with cold water. Right? And then one of the monkeys is taken out and a new monkey
[Guest]: is put in. This new monkey has no idea about this cold water thing. That monkey starts
[Guest]: walking towards the ladder because hey, fruits, the other four will jump and pull it back
[Guest]: before it gets anywhere near the ladder because they know what's going to happen. Then you
[Guest]: have three old monkeys, two new monkeys, two old monkeys, three new monkeys, four, five
[Guest]: new monkeys, none of which have experienced cold water and yet they pull each other back,
[Guest]: but they know that there's a rule. The rule is if you go close to the ladder, something
[Amit Varma]: bad will happen. We don't let that happen. Right. And you know, and conservatives would
[Amit Varma]: love this because it tells you that rules evolve for a reason. Traditions evolve for
[Guest]: a reason. Absolutely. No. And you know, it might not be as blatant as you will experience
[Guest]: something unpleasant if you try to go and grab that reward.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason may not always be a nice thing. Here it's you want to avoid cold water, but
[Amit Varma]: you know, you have other kinds of impulses and instincts.
[Guest]: But the insight is that there are some things that we don't mess with because we know that
[Guest]: there are going to be negative consequences. In a game that's played out long enough with
[Guest]: enough trust builds out, the rule actually takes on that sort of existence of its own.
[Guest]: You know, if you read like Fraser's work in sociology on like the evolution of religion,
[Guest]: for instance, it's precisely that first it's the divine that's sacred, then it's the rules
[Guest]: that you have to follow in interacting with the divine that becomes sacred. Eventually,
[Guest]: you know, the divine is forgotten, but the rules and the people who enforce them still
[Guest]: have sacred authority. You could substitute government for sacred authority there if you
[Guest]: like. Right. The church is one form of government in itself. And the government is one form
[Guest]: of religion. And the government is a form of religion in itself as well. So as I said,
[Guest]: one thing that happens is that the rules take on a life of their own. The other thing that
[Guest]: happens is that there is a sort of social and political capital that emerges. And somebody
[Guest]: who's a reasonably talented political entrepreneur can say, here is this other risky area where
[Guest]: we haven't really solved this cooperation problem yet. But you know that you can trust
[Guest]: me from this other arena. So come let's try and do this here as well. Right. And this
[Guest]: is a development of alliances as a concept over a period of time. And so what you get
[Guest]: is you get these rules that stand on their own and then you get these institutions that
[Guest]: are built on a shared understanding of the rules and on a shared set of values that,
[Guest]: you know, are the philosophical equivalent of we don't go near that ladder. So your insight
[Amit Varma]: really here is like, you know, when I read Axelrod first and I read about all of this
[Amit Varma]: work and Robert Rivers work and so on, and my sense was, okay, this really explains how
[Amit Varma]: society works or cooperation within society works. But what you're putting out is that
[Amit Varma]: these rules that emerge lead to institutions, and then whatever government forms, whatever
[Amit Varma]: the state is, they have to abide by these rules in these institutions. And at some point,
[Amit Varma]: they get codified and they become part of the law or the constitution or whatever. And
[Amit Varma]: these are the rules of the game and that they evolved first and the state came later. Is
[Guest]: that sort of a correct understanding of it? Again, I mean, let's keep the conceptual apart
[Guest]: from the historic, right? If you're going to look at the timeline, they probably evolved
[Guest]: co-evilly at the same time, you know, and they didn't evolve in silos, right? Like,
[Guest]: not every country had to go through the collapse of the Soviet Union to decide that fully planned
[Guest]: system of government was not necessarily a bright idea. And so there is an element of
[Guest]: vicarious learning that goes on as well. But certainly, if you're going to talk about laws,
[Guest]: I think that that timeline holds, that there were rules and norms and sort of soft customs
[Guest]: or something before eventually somebody codified them. And they got formal sanction behind
[Guest]: them and they became laws.
[Amit Varma]: And if you just look at the foundation of the United States of America, for example,
[Amit Varma]: there was this value, for example, for individual freedom, for the pursuit of happiness, all
[Amit Varma]: the things laid out in the Declaration of Independence were already values that were
[Amit Varma]: being articulated by the people. And that led to a system of government where you had
[Amit Varma]: those rules and institutions in place to protect citizens from the state, which is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a key purpose of the rules and the institutions. For example, you had the Constitution that
[Amit Varma]: was really your set of rules and you had the First Amendment protecting everybody's free
[Amit Varma]: speech and blah, blah, blah, all the way down the line. And all of that kind of falls into
[Amit Varma]: place. But in sort of other states across time, like if you look at India's formation,
[Amit Varma]: what we really did was we adopted a hodgepodge of rules and laws from everywhere. We kept
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the colonial rules that had been formulated in the first place to suppress
[Amit Varma]: a populace. And you know, the rules and institutions for that reason in India aren't so robust
[Amit Varma]: and aren't so liberal, as for example, they are in the USA evolved differently in different
[Amit Varma]: places. So what are those sort of do those processes move in a particular direction necessarily?
[Amit Varma]: And can we pass a value judgment on the process? What if the rules that a constitution sets
[Amit Varma]: merely reflect the norms of that particular society?
[Guest]: So, you know, the first half of that question of like, do these processes move in a specific
[Guest]: direction or predictable trajectory is an easy one. The answer is no. It really is too
[Guest]: generous. It really is. You know, each historical case sort of has to be dealt with on its own
[Amit Varma]: merits.
[Amit Varma]: There's no arc of history here, which always goes in the same direction, the arc of justice.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I wish the answer was yes, right. But clearly, from what we see, I mean, so
[Guest]: again, the caveat is that more and more as we get into the 19th century and the 20th
[Guest]: century and the 21st century, states are not evolving and societies are not evolving in
[Guest]: isolation, right? The most closed societies on the planet right now are North Korea and
[Guest]: Eritrea. Even those states are not sealed off from the world, right? Part of how Eritrea
[Guest]: makes its money is by taxing overseas citizens. They are able to collect that tax because
[Guest]: they threaten family members of those people who are still within the country.
[Guest]: Protection racket.
[Guest]: But protection racket in its simplest form, right? But international, right? And so, the
[Guest]: more that the world itself is interconnected, the more that these institutions are interconnected,
[Guest]: there's something like a tipping point that comes about, right? So, the way that the institutions
[Guest]: and the rules will evolve is still distinct within each country. But the range of possibilities
[Guest]: that it can hold are getting progressively constrained. They're falling within a certain
[Guest]: band of things that other countries share, and especially post the creation of the UN
[Guest]: that they have formally stated a commitment to sharing. There is a Declaration of Principles
[Guest]: that starts the UN Charter as well. The first of those is that every country is a sovereign
[Guest]: equal and nobody shall intervene in its domestic matters. But historically, even that is quite
[Guest]: the exceptional commitment for a country to make, right? And clearly, many countries have
[Guest]: failed to abide by it, even since the adoption of the UN Charter. But it's no longer really
[Guest]: open to a country to say, you know, as part of our constitution, we're going to say, we
[Guest]: espouse the virtue of territorial conquest. It won't fly.
[Amit Varma]: That's because there are rules at the international level also now.
[Guest]: Yes. And like, let's use that softer term rules to mean a lot of fuzzy things and a
[Amit Varma]: lot of hard things. But yes, there are.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And, you know, so to kind of cut to the present day, so what we've always sort
[Amit Varma]: of had is that we have a bunch of these safeguards. Some of these are in the form of these rules
[Amit Varma]: embedded in the constitution or the laws or whatever, which restrain a government. And
[Amit Varma]: we have this bunch of institutions and limits to the sort of interplay between them to make
[Amit Varma]: sure that no one institution gets too powerful or domineering. So in India, you know, you'll
[Amit Varma]: have your in the US, you have your Congress and you have the Senate and the President
[Amit Varma]: only has so much power and he can't really be an overlord. And by and large, have there
[Amit Varma]: been US presidents in the past who have because power always corrupts anyone who comes to
[Amit Varma]: power will want to be as powerful as he possibly can. And therefore, the urge is always going
[Amit Varma]: to be to push back against these institutions and against these rules. And what's that process
[Amit Varma]: been in like in America?
[Guest]: Yeah, so so two things, right. One is I'm going to sort of contest the power always
[Guest]: corrupts rule just my training in in base is I'm a psychologist. And there's fantastic
[Guest]: research on how when you increase power distance between two people, what's happening is not
[Guest]: an abandoning of values or principles. When that happens, it actually happens on the person
[Guest]: who's on the low end of the power scale. The person who's on the high end of the power
[Guest]: scale, what happens is a weakening of communication and empathy. And so you're on guard, and we're
[Guest]: sort of the father of peace research. This is really great quote that says power does
[Guest]: not corrupt power obscures powerlessness corrupts. What power does is it separates you from the
[Guest]: consequences of your actions. And the way that that actually happens,
[Amit Varma]: which leads to a kind of moral corruption in a sense, right?
[Guest]: It does. So what what happens for a lot of people is even if you believe in theory that
[Guest]: the you know, the ends do not justify the means, if you can't actually observe the impact
[Guest]: that the means are having, why would you believe that there's a problem with the means? That's
[Guest]: a great point, right? I immediately thought of demonetization. Indeed, among other things.
[Guest]: And so what happens is no, actually, that's a great example. Because what happens is that
[Guest]: people who manage to hold a certain amount of power, hypothetically can have two somewhat
[Guest]: competing goals, right? They can have specific policy goals and outcomes that they want to
[Guest]: achieve. And they can be invested in the health of the institution and the system itself.
[Guest]: Right? Not every powerful person is, but many are. And in wanting to pursue or achieve a
[Guest]: particular policy goal, and in sort of gathering the amount of power and doing the things that
[Guest]: are necessary to see that happen, they might find that they have undermined the institutions
[Guest]: and in fact done, you know, a lot more harm than they originally thought possible or set
[Guest]: out to do. Obviously, the more isolated from reality, the more separated from the experience
[Guest]: of the daily life of the average person, the leader is the easier this is to happen. And
[Guest]: so in fact, demonetization is a great example, because it's precisely
[Amit Varma]: And like I talk about how Modi probably never went to a grocery store to buy something himself
[Amit Varma]: for the last 20 years. And therefore he had no idea that a 2000 rupee note is actually
[Amit Varma]: used by the common man. To him, it was a store of value as it indeed was in 1978. And therefore
[Amit Varma]: only black money holders must be using it. But actually, everybody used it and he had
[Amit Varma]: no idea because like you said, he was so insulated from the common man that I mean, it was an
[Amit Varma]: error in knowledge.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think that's a that's a process that we can generalize. We can say that a
[Guest]: lot of people who don't necessarily say, listen, like, my goal in life is to become the Shahenshah
[Guest]: still walk that path because they find that to achieve the specific policy goals that
[Guest]: they want, they end up having to centralize power. Recent American history, there is no
[Guest]: sort of, you know, Shakespearean tragicomic hero that illustrates this better than Barack
[Guest]: Obama, who was a constitutional law professor himself, cannot have been ignorant to sort
[Guest]: of the institutional ramifications of what he was doing. But at the same time was a political
[Guest]: leader confronted with another branch of government that was held by the opposing party and said
[Guest]: that its stated objective is to undermine everything that he does. And so it's funny
[Guest]: because this guy, this guy who again is like a balance of powers enthusiast, becomes one
[Guest]: of the strongest practitioners of executive power, becomes one of the most frequent users
[Guest]: of executive orders in recent American history, because he's like, I can't get anything done
[Guest]: otherwise. Can you elaborate on that a bit? So for instance, Obama, when he was still
[Guest]: a candidate, and was running for office, was deeply critical of the wars that his predecessor
[Guest]: Bush had started. Correct. Right. And he had this very lawyerly critique of them, which
[Guest]: was that within American domestic law, the authority to declare war is actually vested
[Guest]: in the Congress and not with the president, right? The president has authority to command
[Guest]: the military, and to take actions that are necessary in defense of the country. But the
[Guest]: president cannot declare that the country is at war with another sovereign power. That's
[Guest]: actually for the Congress. Right? This is extremely important part of US history called
[Amit Varma]: the war powers resolution. And this actually tells you how an institution acts as a check
[Guest]: on the overreach by any one person, for example. Absolutely, because in Congress, it would
[Guest]: take a vote, right, as opposed to like an executive decision. And so his sort of very,
[Guest]: as I said, very nerdy critique of the US wars in Iraq, not so much Afghanistan, but Iraq,
[Guest]: was that we don't actually have proof that the party that we went after in Afghanistan
[Guest]: is present in Iraq, or that there's any connection between them. Hence the legal document, it's
[Guest]: called an authorization for the use of military force that pertains to Afghanistan, really
[Guest]: can't be transferred easily to Iraq. Okay, there's a separate authorization for the use
[Guest]: of military force in Iraq, that really can't be transferred easily to Syria or to like
[Guest]: wherever else we think or like Somalia or Mali or wherever we think that this group
[Guest]: is cropping up, right? Obama as president oversaw a vast expansion in the number of
[Guest]: military actions, not just in Afghanistan and Iraq, but in Syria, in Yemen, in Mali,
[Guest]: in Somalia, in Niger, that's just the countries I know about now. I'm sure that when records
[Guest]: are declassified, there will be even more. One of my favourite law professors is Rosa
[Guest]: Brooks at Georgetown Law. And she wrote an op-ed about this somewhere at the midpoint
[Guest]: of the US presidency, which was titled AUOMFG. So she smushed together AUMF and OMFG. Just
[Guest]: to say, how far are you going to stretch this authorization to like, you're in 17 countries
[Guest]: when you said that it shouldn't even be two, right? And Obama's sort of dodge on this was,
[Guest]: I'm going to authorize drone strikes, but I'm not going to deploy. So have you heard
[Guest]: the phrase boots on the ground? Yeah, of course. I'm not going to deploy boots on the ground.
[Guest]: And you know, this got roundly mocked in Washington, they were like, cartoons of like, you know,
[Guest]: people doing like, Tom Cruise Mission Impossible style hanging from a wire and like, my boots
[Guest]: are not touching the ground. And it's just an example of there were probably more productive
[Guest]: ways to handle whatever threats there were to American national security at that time,
[Guest]: right? But they would have required the executive and the Congress to work together. But Obama
[Guest]: found himself in a situation where having once said, no, look, it's within my power
[Guest]: to decide you gave me the authorization, I'm going to target these guys, whatever these
[Guest]: guys are, I can go. If he walked that back, he'd have to walk back everything else he
[Guest]: wanted to do as well. Right. And so it was no longer in his interest. He became a strong
[Amit Varma]: executive power theorist. I mean, if he makes the same principled argument in 2007, he doesn't
[Amit Varma]: become president because he's for the war on, you know, then he can't criticize George
[Guest]: Bush at all on the grounds that he did. Yeah. So I, my sense is that the criticism that
[Guest]: he made of the views that he espoused as a candidate were genuine and principled at the
[Guest]: time at the time. And then he was confronted with the reality of having to enact security
[Guest]: policy with especially post the midterms, a split government. Healthcare was originally
[Guest]: introduced by executive order, right? Like massive healthcare reform in the United States
[Guest]: with like the largest, I mean, by financial value, the largest healthcare industry in
[Guest]: the world. Right. And you're going to reform that by fiat, like, you know, running roughshod
[Guest]: over the institutions, which were there for a reason, like, forget about the effectiveness
[Guest]: of it, right? Just as a matter of political strategy, it's so much weaker to be in that
[Guest]: situation. Right. Right. And in fact, his successor has done his best to undermine it
[Guest]: on precisely that basis. Right. And so there were a lot of people who even in, let's say,
[Guest]: 2010, 2012, were already saying, listen, we're comfortable surrendering a bunch more executive
[Guest]: authority to this guy because it's this guy. Yeah. And we know that he's a constitutional
[Guest]: law professor. And we know that, like, he agonizes over these things. And like, look,
[Guest]: his hair is turning white thinking about them, literally. And but if we're not ready to do
[Guest]: it for any other precedent, then, you know, we should really be careful about how much
[Amit Varma]: ground are willing to give this guy. And what that kind of seems to illustrate is that the
[Amit Varma]: Obama who's campaigning and the Trump who's campaigning are entirely different creatures.
[Amit Varma]: But when in power, the imperatives of power, the incentives of power, what I would call
[Amit Varma]: the corrupting influence of power, though you've, I mean, not in a direct way in terms
[Amit Varma]: of but the kind of moral corrosion that happens, they're all the same.
[Amit Varma]: So that would be true of anyone before Trump. Right. And that also leads you to a dilemma
[Amit Varma]: that you know, we discuss the importance of rules and institutions. But the argument that
[Amit Varma]: say Obama could have made is that look with with the kind of gridlock that there is with
[Amit Varma]: the Congress and the Senate, and they're not cooperating with me on anything. I can't get
[Amit Varma]: anything done because of these rules and these institutions. So therefore, I have to go past
[Amit Varma]: them. How does one answer that? I mean, regardless of whether that's Obama saying that or Trump
[Amit Varma]: saying that because it's the same thing being said you it's a mistake to look at the one
[Amit Varma]: guy or and it's hypocritical to approve of one guy saying that and disapprove of the
[Amit Varma]: other. In principle, either one agrees with it or one doesn't. I mean, one draws a line
[Amit Varma]: and says that, you know, the rules and institutions are this important and no more or no less.
[Guest]: How does one reconcile that? Creatively? No, I mean, again, so I like my about half the
[Guest]: classes I took in graduate school were about negotiation and negotiation in like, quote
[Guest]: unquote, intractable and wicked problems, right? This is one, right? Do you care about
[Guest]: the policy goal? Yes, of course you do. Do you care about the health of the institution?
[Guest]: Yes, of course you do. Are these two related? Yes, they are. Because if you constantly fail
[Guest]: at delivering policy goals, the institution is going to be undermined in a different sense.
[Guest]: Even if you're sort of complying by the rules, at some point of time, the electorate is going
[Guest]: to be like these are stupid rules, right? Because nobody's able to do the things that
[Amit Varma]: we need to get done. Give me a concrete illustration of this. I mean, thought experiment way, not
[Guest]: something that has happened, obviously. But yeah, because I don't necessarily have one
[Guest]: off the top of my head. I mean, you can imagine that actually, so most countries that have
[Guest]: like a split executive and legislature have rules on the adoption of any law, right? And
[Guest]: they require that a certain majority in one house and a certain majority in another house,
[Guest]: then the executive gets to either sign or reject. If the executive rejects, typically,
[Guest]: the legislature gets to give it another pass. If the legislature sends it back, then that
[Guest]: has to be passed. If you think about it, if the outcome of this was basically that for
[Guest]: like eight years, no laws were passed, I can imagine that people would sort of be like,
[Guest]: okay, this is no longer working. We need to change this. We need to either like mess with
[Guest]: the majority margins that are involved. Or we need to make one or the other party be
[Guest]: bound by the decision of the other, right? And but the thing to keep in mind there is
[Guest]: that even within the existing rules about sort of you need this much majority and you
[Guest]: need this sequence of approvals. It's not like people are taking each policy issue as
[Guest]: an individual thing and being like, no, but this is the exact thing that I need to happen
[Guest]: on this. And this is separate from the rest of the world and the rest of politics. No,
[Guest]: people are trading off their priorities on competing legislations, right? I mean, this
[Guest]: sounds bad in practice, because you're like, you know, oh, if I like let you export onions,
[Guest]: then you will let me allow children with disabilities to be adopted or something like that. I, you
[Guest]: know, hypothetical example, but not implausible. And so, you know, we don't like to think about
[Guest]: policies, being formed with this sort of like, you know, bazaar style trading of whose interests
[Guest]: are what, but that's a democratic government functioning is designed.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in public choice series, there's a term called log rolling, which is about
[Amit Varma]: how different interest groups, very disparate interest groups come together to increase
[Amit Varma]: their bargaining power in this political marketplace, pretty much the same process playing out.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And so you're seeing it play out even now where Trump is basically saying to
[Guest]: his entire Congress, I want money to build a wall at the border. And I'm going to hold
[Guest]: anything and everything that you'll want done hostage to this. Right? Again, it sounds like
[Guest]: it sounds deeply odious to us, because the particular thing that he's holding the stuff
[Guest]: hostage for is this ridiculous border wall. But he's far from the first president to say
[Guest]: I'm going to hold proposals hostage to like my pet policy thing that you all have to approve,
[Guest]: right? Obama also tried this with healthcare. Right? Right. Again, he failed. Congress was
[Guest]: like, nope, we're like, it's a bigger priority for us to make sure that your healthcare reform
[Guest]: does not pass, then that anything we want to pass does pass. And so, actually, no longer
[Guest]: a hypothetical, because for a number of procedural votes within the US government, they actually
[Guest]: did change the rules to overcome this sort of logjam. Right? They actually did change
[Guest]: the levels of majorities that you had to get in the Senate on a bunch of things to do with
[Guest]: like appointments and budgets, precisely because the the institutional logjam was causing too
[Amit Varma]: much damage. The existing distribution of seats was leading to a complete lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: Right? Right. So, you know, we'll take a quick commercial break. And when we come back,
[Amit Varma]: we'll get to the orange haired giant himself, Donald Trump. Quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hello, hello, hello, everybody. Welcome to another great week on IBM podcast. If you
[Unknown]: aren't following us on social media, please make sure you do we're IBM podcast on Facebook,
[Unknown]: Twitter and Instagram. If you guys want to catch Cyrus's rant on Cyrus says live,
[Unknown]: you can definitely check out Instagram. We kind of publish that live every time we're doing it
[Unknown]: on Tuesday afternoons. Make sure you check in for that. On Cyrus this week, actually,
[Unknown]: we had a really great guest Roshan Abbas. Roshan talks about a wonderful career spanning radio,
[Unknown]: TV, live events, entrepreneurship, and now he's an author too. It's full of funny stories. I think
[Unknown]: you guys will really enjoy it. On Simplified, Chuck, Naren and Shrikant simplify the central
[Unknown]: banks and RBI, how they work and why they've been making the news off late. On the 99th episode of
[Unknown]: the scene in the unseen, Amit is joined by lawyer and policy analyst Amaya Naik. They talk about
[Unknown]: the rules and institutions that keep populist readers in check and how they are being meddled
[Unknown]: with. On Vartalaab, Akash and Naveen have a fun and insightful chat with Nikhil Udupa and Himanshu
[Unknown]: Vaswani. They're the founders of 4x4 experiences and have created Control or Delete, India's
[Unknown]: largest crowdsourced live music gathering. On the first three episodes of The Habit Coach,
[Unknown]: Ashlyn talks about dopamine, fidgeting and melatonin. Episodes are out every Monday,
[Unknown]: Wednesday and Friday. Give it a listen to improve your habits. On Football Twaddle,
[Unknown]: the boys discuss Chelsea beating Manchester City, the Raheem Sterling incident and the
[Unknown]: Oba Mayang incident. On Geekfruit, Dinkar and Jishnu get into the holiday spirit by discussing
[Unknown]: the best Christmas movies of all time and their favourite Christmas songs. And with that,
[Amit Varma]: on with your shows. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Amaya Naik about
[Amit Varma]: the importance of rules and institutions with specific reference to the August figure of
[Amit Varma]: Donald Trump. Trump fits that classic populist mold that you know, John Werner Muller wrote his
[Amit Varma]: book on and that I referred to of a populist who's come and you know, he shares all the things that
[Amit Varma]: populists tend to have in common through the ages and in the world today in the sense that they have
[Amit Varma]: this sense of victimhood and they are ranting against the elites and they are constructing
[Amit Varma]: all these simplistic narratives and they are breaking down institutions. And the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing about Trump is that this works at two levels. One, it works at the domestic level where
[Amit Varma]: there are so many institutions and there is this constant interplay and like you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: he's not the first person to have, you know, tried to push those boundaries. But it's also
[Amit Varma]: more worrying at the international level because the US is simply still the reigning superpower in
[Amit Varma]: the world. And, you know, one mad guy on top who is trying to undermine all the international
[Amit Varma]: institutions and rules which do a lot of good is extremely dangerous for all of us.
[Guest]: That's exactly right. You know, I think we can we can sort of deal with each of those sequentially.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. So, yeah, it is important to keep in mind that Trump's political beliefs don't
[Guest]: necessarily make him unique, especially in the US political spectrum. There are other people who had
[Guest]: those same views. His views on the US role in the international order also don't really make him
[Guest]: unique. There's a smaller chunk of people that have those views. But they exist. I mean, John
[Guest]: Bolton was the United States ambassador to the UN in a previous administration as well.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there have been isolationists and there have been anti free traders and all of that isn't
[Guest]: really new. There are two things that make Trump unique. The first is just the fact that he actually
[Guest]: got elected. Right. Because generally people who have these views haven't actually gotten into the
[Guest]: most powerful seat in the country slash the world because the nature of democratic politics is to
[Guest]: generally privilege moderation. Right. You need to build a broader coalition to build a broader
[Amit Varma]: coalition. You need to sort of tone down your rhetoric. That's a median voter theorem where
[Amit Varma]: basically all parties during the general election sort of go towards the middle. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: there is an acceptable spectrum from which all leaders tend to emerge. And then they do the same
[Amit Varma]: crappy things because power corrupts. But they emerge from that limited spectrum. And Trump is
[Guest]: just way out. He's an outlier in that sense. And that's why I said, you know, he's also the
[Guest]: exception to like the people campaigning within the median and then like do extreme things.
[Guest]: He campaigned on the extremes. Right. Right. He campaigned saying, you know, openly racist
[Guest]: things about Mexicans, for instance, he campaigned accusing a judge of Mexican heritage of being
[Amit Varma]: biased against him. He said Mexicans are rapists, if I remember correctly. And bringing crime and
[Guest]: bringing drugs, etc, etc. So, yeah, he's unique in that he did that and won, which I currently have
[Guest]: to think of as a historical accident, and which I sort of hope is a historical accident. The other
[Guest]: thing that makes him unique is that, or at least unique in like modern history in the US, is that
[Guest]: he is so blatantly out to enrich himself. So, you know, we said that there are institutions,
[Guest]: there are rules, some of the rules are formal, so their laws, others are just norms and customs.
[Guest]: If you ask sort of, why do all of these exist? They exist so that people in power will serve
[Guest]: the public interest. And so sort of the, you know, almost rule zero of government is avoid
[Guest]: conflicts of interest. Right. Right. Trump is like, Trump actually shares that opinion about
[Guest]: we should not have a conflict of interest, but he's, you know, he's flipped it on its head.
[Guest]: So he comes in saying, what is the conflict, I'm going to pursue my own personal interests,
[Guest]: national interests be damned. And it's, it's pretty amazing. Like we have a number of actual
[Guest]: or wannabe autocrats, right, some of whom have been elected, others have gotten power in other
[Guest]: ways. Trump is a wannabe kleptocrat much more than he's a wannabe autocrat. Well said. Right?
[Guest]: He's not fixated on, well, I take this back, I was going to say he's not fixated on power so much
[Guest]: as he is on wealth. I'm not sure that that's a meaningful distinction in his head. So, but,
[Guest]: but you know, he's, the way that he thinks about power and the way that he thinks about interest
[Guest]: is the accumulation of basically money for himself and his family. And I think in a way,
[Amit Varma]: I see him as this megalomaniac duffer who was winging his way through life and all of this
[Amit Varma]: shit just happened. And in that sense, he's both an accidental autocrat and an accidental kleptocrat.
[Amit Varma]: This shit just happened. It's not like he had a grand plan and he made, I mean, he was actually
[Amit Varma]: expecting, perhaps even hoping to lose the election by some accounts. And simply, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: he didn't have a transition team in place. He didn't expect to be president and he's kind of
[Guest]: been winging it all the way. Well, so I mean, there's multiple pieces to, by the way, before
[Guest]: I get into that, right, can I just say, you know, I told you I'm a psychologist by training, right?
[Guest]: And the last like century plus in psychology has basically been pushing back on this like
[Guest]: great person theory of leadership. Thomas Carlyle. You know, even like, let's not fixate on the
[Guest]: personality of the person in power because the situation and like sort of the exigencies and
[Guest]: the constraints of historical currents are what they are, are much bigger. And so it's really
[Guest]: frustrating to me to have to spend this much time analyzing the personality of this guy,
[Guest]: because it sort of cuts in the exact opposite direction of what I've been arguing so far.
[Guest]: But again, he actually did get into power. And he does believe that everything is shaped by his
[Guest]: singular interests and personality. And at that point of time, I mean, it's who, Louis XIV who
[Guest]: said, I am the state. Trump shares that view, but for the time being, temporarily, he's kind of
[Amit Varma]: right. No, and the interesting thing is, it's not as if a leader like him was a historical
[Amit Varma]: inevitability. Honestly, you take Trump out of the picture. I don't see anyone in the political
[Amit Varma]: landscape who's remotely like this, you know? Yeah, I mean, yeah, Ted Cruz would have appealed
[Amit Varma]: to many of the same people and could have come to power and all that. But he was essentially also a
[Amit Varma]: guy who believed in these rules and institutions to some extent and accomplished lawyer himself.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you wouldn't have a complete madcap guy like Trump in power, no matter what happened.
[Guest]: Yeah. Again, there are other countries that have been led by small time crooks who then become big
[Guest]: time crooks. But in the current American context, it's kind of hard to imagine anybody except Trump
[Guest]: pulling this off. I agree. And so this is why Trump is so, so corrosive to institutions, right?
[Guest]: Because the sort of again, the sort of virtue zero of all institutions in the public spaces,
[Guest]: no self dealing, no conflicts of interest. And he demonstrates time and time and time again,
[Guest]: that he does not share that value. He does not understand the reason or the purpose or the
[Guest]: virtue of that. And so every time he interacts with any institution, he's doing it out of some
[Guest]: sort of just very blatant, very crass self-interest. And he almost acts aggrieved and behaves as if
[Amit Varma]: this is unfair. It's like, hey, the people elected me and now I'm the king. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: who was anyone to be a check on me? Let me do what I want. The people elected me. I have sort
[Guest]: of ultimate authority. And also, isn't this what being president means is that I give orders and
[Guest]: people follow them. And of course, every previous president could have told him and probably did
[Guest]: tell him, no, it does not. But the man is determined to behave as if it actually is, right.
[Guest]: And so there's just so many ways that this plays out in the domestic space. Right. So
[Guest]: the most obvious one, again, has to do with just making money. There is a clause in the United
[Guest]: States Constitution that has suddenly sort of like nobody used it, nobody heard about it. And
[Guest]: then in the past couple of years, it sort of made its way back into public discourse.
[Guest]: It's called the Emoluments Clause of the Constitution, right. It's roughly the same
[Guest]: as like the Office of Profit Act that India had. It basically said, if you are a functionary of
[Guest]: government, you should not be making money on the side. The Emoluments Clause is a little more
[Guest]: specific. It says you should not be accepting money or anything of value from a foreign government.
[Guest]: Right. But foreign government is pretty broadly defined, right? Like it's, it's also agents and
[Guest]: representatives of a foreign government, counters from a foreign government. Things of value is
[Guest]: also fairly widely defined. It's not literal money. There can be various things that would be
[Guest]: useful. This is why there are like protocol vetted and approved gifts for state functions, right.
[Guest]: And this is why any senior like an ambassador or whoever or whatever, if they receive anything,
[Guest]: they have to like report the gifts that they get. If it's above a certain value, then it's actually,
[Guest]: I mean, confiscated is too harsh a word, right? They voluntarily surrender it. And it's either
[Guest]: like given to a museum or something, or it's put into this big auction and the proceeds are used
[Guest]: towards, you know, whatever, like a widows and orphans fund or something. Trump owns multiple
[Guest]: commercial properties around the country. Around the world. He actively promotes them. The
[Guest]: shining example is the Trump International Hotel in Washington, DC, which was renovated and
[Guest]: reopened right about when he became president, and which has been booked out by foreign governments
[Guest]: ever since. Right. And of course, this is money going into the president's pocket. Of course,
[Guest]: people are like booking large venues and like keeping it booked into like stay in his good
[Guest]: books. He has golf courses around the country. He has whatever that holiday resort is in Florida
[Guest]: that he keeps escaping to as well. The name escapes me for a second. But where like they
[Guest]: were actively like they hiked up membership fees after he became president. They were selling
[Guest]: spots at like an adjacent table to him at like the holiday party or stuff. When I say he does
[Amit Varma]: it in a really crass way, I pay a premium for that seat. Though I don't have any money, but if I did,
[Guest]: I would. I mean, I would pay a premium for it. And then like, you know, install like that bloated
[Guest]: Trump baby blimp there or something maybe. But it's just really, really obvious that he has
[Guest]: commercial interests that are benefiting from his being president. The norm, but not the law
[Guest]: that previous presidents have followed, is to either divest their assets or put them under a
[Guest]: blind trust. Right. Right. The point of the blind trust, of course, is then you don't know what that
[Guest]: person is doing and you don't know how the policies that you're working on might affect those
[Guest]: outcomes. Right. Jimmy Carter famously had to sell his peanut farm before he became president.
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully not for peanuts.
[Guest]: And Trump has refused to do this. And it's a norm and not a law. And so every time he's sort of
[Guest]: like, but there's nothing that says I have to do it. Technically, he's right. Right. But starting
[Guest]: from I mean, that's exactly where the corrosion starts. The second thing you can look at for
[Guest]: the sort of Trump's domestic corrosion of institutions is the people that he's put in
[Guest]: charge of different offices in government, different ministries, different departments,
[Guest]: different secretaries. Betsy DeVos, who's his education secretary, has massive commercial
[Guest]: interests in charter schooling. Right. Of course, the way that he argues is that she is a prominent
[Guest]: educationist. So, of course, she would know. Right. But you are putting the person whose
[Guest]: entire business model is dependent upon students leaving public schools and going to charter schools
[Guest]: in charge of public schooling. I don't think I need to spell out the rest of that. Right.
[Guest]: His secretary of the interior, I think, a guy called Ryan Zinke, is the subject of I don't even
[Guest]: know how many like ethics and misbehavior investigations. It's like in double digits and like
[Guest]: 40 plus or something at last count. And remember, they've been in power for less than two years.
[Guest]: Right. So these are all things that either he's done or that have come to light in the period of
[Guest]: like the last 18 months or something, which is like, you know, a new infraction every other week.
[Amit Varma]: So we kind of look at this and we say that, okay, you know, he's running roughshod over all
[Amit Varma]: these rules, but they apply to the executive branch. And surely the other institutions in
[Amit Varma]: the US government will prevent too much damage from happening. In theory, yes. It could still
[Guest]: happen. Right. I mean, Zinke, for instance, I said he faces investigations. Right. Sure. Yes,
[Guest]: he is being investigated. Part of the problem is that by the time they stopped, some of the
[Guest]: damage is already done. There's no automatic process. That means that because we think that
[Guest]: the way that you did this was shady, hence, whatever you decided to do is now reversed.
[Guest]: Right. Again, that would be a normative or a customary way to approach that question.
[Guest]: But there isn't necessarily a black letter law that makes it that way. People who saw value in
[Guest]: preserving the institutions would act that way voluntarily to say, no, I want to avoid even the
[Guest]: appearance that there is a conflict here. Right. Right. Clearly not this group of people. Added
[Guest]: to that is the fact that politically and electorally, the Republican Party lawmakers
[Guest]: who currently hold the majority in the upper house and until a couple of weeks ago held the
[Guest]: majority in the lower house as well, believed that their political success and their political
[Guest]: survival depended on being seen as sort of sticking close to Trump and not frustrating his agenda.
[Guest]: The late Senator John McCain famously torpedoed Trump's effort to repeal Obama's healthcare law
[Guest]: and like got tons of hate mail for it, which is pretty exceptional because the guy is sort of like
[Guest]: a folk American hero, right? Exactly. Former prisoner of war during the Vietnam War,
[Amit Varma]: legendary law, like Senator in his own right. You spoke about how there's no Shakespearean drama,
[Amit Varma]: but I'd say just a fact on how his own people turned on John McCain in the winter of his years
[Amit Varma]: is a Shakespeare tragedy in itself. King Lear in DC, I guess. Whether or not you agree with that.
[Guest]: I agree with the guy, that's irrelevant. Yeah, yeah, I'm not, I'm not trying to
[Guest]: eulogize John McCain as such. I'm just saying he was a politically popular figure. Exactly.
[Guest]: And fighting Trump on healthcare cost him a lot of that. And a lot of Republicans looked at that
[Guest]: and said, do I want to be that guy? Right, right. Another senator, Jeff Flake sort of
[Guest]: started walking that path, but has been quite silent since then and has not actually voted
[Guest]: against his party on issues where he says Trump is doing the wrong thing. Right. So here is a term
[Guest]: that I will generally not use because I think it gets abused a lot, but I'm going to use it of Jeff
[Guest]: Flake. He's virtue signaling. He really is. Because he has the ability to vote differently.
[Guest]: But he sort of furrows his brow and says, this is a very sad thing. And then he votes for it.
[Guest]: And he's not even running for re-election. His seat has now been taken over by somebody else.
[Guest]: Right. Or will be. Sorry, his seat is falling vacant and somebody will be appointed to it in
[Guest]: the near future. So Congress is a check, iffy, right? With the Democrat Party taking control of
[Guest]: the lower house may start being more effective as a check. It's possible. The judiciary has been
[Guest]: being a check in many ways. Absolutely. The problem, so there's a little bit of a tangent,
[Guest]: right? But if there's listeners who are sort of interested in the comparative legal system
[Guest]: between India and the US, one of the biggest differences between the US and India when it
[Guest]: comes to litigation, especially litigation against the government, is that the US has extremely
[Guest]: strict rules on standing. Standing is who actually has the right to bring a lawsuit.
[Guest]: Right. So we have phenomenally lack sort of PIL style standing, right? If somebody somewhere is
[Guest]: harmed, you as a civic minded citizen can sort of approach the court saying, look, somebody is being
[Guest]: harmed, violation of fundamental rights, please do something. Right. And different judges over
[Guest]: the years have sort of had their own attitudes towards this. In the US, the rules are a lot
[Guest]: stricter. You have to typically show that you, the person bringing the suit, are experiencing some
[Guest]: kind of harm. And it can be even more complicated. You might have to show that, say, for instance,
[Guest]: you're not actually a national of the country, you might have to show that even though you're
[Guest]: not a national, you actually have the right to approach that forum because the nature of the
[Guest]: harm that you're facing offends the right that is not guaranteed just to nationals or just to
[Guest]: citizens. It's guaranteed to like all people who happen to be within the territory of the country
[Guest]: or something. So you could bring a freedom of speech action even as a non-citizen, because
[Guest]: that's not limited to citizens. It's guaranteed to everybody in the country. You might not be
[Guest]: able to bring a right to bear arms action. Right. And so suing the federal government in the United
[Guest]: States is actually a lot harder than suing the central government in India. That said, a number
[Guest]: of Trump's policies have landed up in court. Right. He revoked a reporter's press pass a couple of
[Amit Varma]: what last week? Yeah, something like that. Yeah, we're recording this on November 20. By the way,
[Amit Varma]: the CNN guy Costa, I think is right. CNN went to court. And interestingly, Fox stood by CNN
[Guest]: in that which was refreshing. Yeah, no, I think the entire White House Correspondents Association
[Guest]: was like, wait, you can revoke a pass for people being rude to the president? Like,
[Guest]: none of us is going to get to get in here eventually. Right. And the court stayed it.
[Guest]: It's a stay. It's not a final ruling. It's an interim ruling. But generally speaking,
[Guest]: in matters like this, if you can win the interim relief, you have a pretty good shot of winning
[Guest]: the final thing as well. Right. Because the basis for winning the interim thing is that you were
[Guest]: experiencing harm while that thing was in effect. And so it needs to be stopped.
[Guest]: If the judges basically already conceded that you're probably facing harm,
[Guest]: yeah, it's likely to be reversed. A bunch of executive orders he signed around
[Guest]: immigration and deportations, famously the bans that he wanted to sign. All of these things were
[Amit Varma]: challenged successfully in court, which is therefore sort of a sign of hope that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the rules and institutions are working. Would you would you say that? Yes. Or you'd qualify it.
[Guest]: I mean, so this is why I really like that we started with like the game theory of this and
[Guest]: like the evolution of cooperation in this, right? There are the formal institutions and the formal
[Guest]: laws. And they will, to some extent, jealously guard their powers and their remits and like
[Guest]: see to their enforcement. But then surrounding all of that are these entire sets of norms and
[Guest]: customs and beliefs that if left to run in a positive feedback cycle, start guiding people
[Guest]: towards greater trust and greater cooperation. That stuff is being damaged. That stuff is being
[Guest]: harmed. It is being reversed. You know, again, let me not be so sort of ahistorical as to put the
[Guest]: blame or to put all of the blame on Trump, right? But as the guy in power who is constantly sending
[Guest]: out the message saying the institutions don't matter, the rules don't matter, what I want matters,
[Guest]: that's I think doing sort of a, it's doing a degree of harm that is not necessarily visible now,
[Guest]: but that is actually going to outlast his presidency by a long time. So that's what
[Amit Varma]: my question is about. I mean, there's one view of Trump that look, this is an accident of history.
[Amit Varma]: It's an outlier. Here's one mad guy who's gotten to the presidency. But hey, the rules and
[Amit Varma]: institutions are robust and we'll outlast this and we'll have a sensible president next time,
[Amit Varma]: or at least a time after that, and things will be back to normal and there'll be no lasting damage.
[Amit Varma]: But your point is that there can be lasting damage out of all this, all of this man shenanigans,
[Amit Varma]: which would indicate that the rules and institutions weren't strong enough to begin with.
[Guest]: I mean, if you Yeah, sure. Like I'll sign on to that. Yeah, they weren't nearly as strong as we
[Guest]: like to imagine they are. They look strong when like somebody who already believes in them is
[Amit Varma]: operating them. So what is the lasting damage? Is it a lasting damage to for example, the norms that
[Amit Varma]: govern conflict of interest and you can't do anything with personal profit or is a greater
[Guest]: damage than that? So it's hard for me to answer that question, basically, because it depends on
[Guest]: what us lawmakers do next, right? Right. US lawmakers can say, Hey, we used to have all
[Guest]: these norms. And we were happy with their functioning because people are bided by them.
[Guest]: And then we elected a guy who's been destruction testing them. And now that he's actually breached
[Guest]: a bunch of them, we're going to reinforce them, we're actually going to turn them into laws.
[Guest]: Right. In which case, the potential damage will be greatly mitigated. But if they don't,
[Guest]: right, the next chap who finds himself in that situation, and for some completely unrelated
[Guest]: reason decides, it's going to be embarrassing for me to release my tax returns.
[Guest]: And there's a precedent for not doing so suddenly,
[Guest]: you know, no longer has to lift this great burden of being the first person to do so.
[Amit Varma]: And what Trump has also done is in a manner of speaking, he's already caused lasting damage,
[Amit Varma]: not specifically to the US, we can't say that yet to the institutions and rules,
[Amit Varma]: but he's demolished the Republican Party, the Republican Party today
[Amit Varma]: is a different beast from what it was the way I see it. And that morally corrosive effect
[Amit Varma]: that power can have on one person has in a manner of speaking spread through the party.
[Guest]: Yeah, I, again, it's a very chicken and egg question, right around sort of
[Guest]: who started turning more extreme first, right? There's a book by...
[Amit Varma]: And there are really three parties here. It's not as if who between Trump and the Republican Party
[Amit Varma]: is between who between Trump, the Republican Party, and the voter base that they traditionally
[Amit Varma]: appeal to.
[Guest]: Right. And yeah, I mean, look, the question gets broader and broader every time we take a stab at
[Guest]: it, right? Like, oh, there are actually 17 parties. No, the core point is just that.
[Guest]: How do I say this? Bad behavior gives permission for future bad behavior.
[Guest]: Yeah. Yeah.
[Guest]: That's the lasting damage.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a vicious cycle. I mean,
[Guest]: Absolutely. Well, and the things that are most vulnerable to it are precisely the things that
[Guest]: are not actually written up into formal law.
[Amit Varma]: And the benchmarks go lower and lower. So I can easily see, you know, if the future president
[Amit Varma]: from the Democratic Party can easily resort to whataboutery anytime he's questioned and say,
[Amit Varma]: but hey, look what that guy did. And the benchmarks have then just come down a long way.
[Guest]: So this is a live debate within the Democratic Party this instant, right? And, you know, a number
[Guest]: of my friends who are about our age, so they're not necessarily active in terms of being
[Guest]: representatives, but they are very active in terms of being campaign workers, in terms of being
[Guest]: staffers, in terms of being fundraisers, in terms of being policy experts. It's a very, very live
[Guest]: debate about whether the Democratic Party, having gotten a measure of power, should respond to
[Guest]: Republican or Trump hardball tactics in kind, or whether they should sort of model a different
[Guest]: kind of behavior. I would say Obama tried this as well for a while, right? He tried to model
[Guest]: Trump's sort of consensus model of decision making. And at some point, he was just, I think
[Guest]: he said something to the effect of like, you know, you can't dance without a partner or something
[Guest]: like that. And at least on a certain set of issues, stopped trying. So yeah, one possible outcome
[Guest]: is that all like the general nature of politics in the United States becomes coarser and more
[Guest]: divisive and more aligned to groups and more aligned to what some theorists, although again,
[Guest]: I disagree with this characterization, but what some theorists will describe as identity politics,
[Guest]: it's possible, because it's the classic, it's the domestic political equivalent of the security
[Guest]: dilemma, right? You chose to escalate one step more, I can either escalate to match you,
[Guest]: or I can put my faith in the existing rules and institutions to prevent you from getting away
[Guest]: with it. And that could take me further behind. And in the short term, that's almost guaranteed
[Guest]: to put me further behind. Right? And this is a dilemma. If you abide by the rules, while somebody
[Guest]: else is undermining them, you can be modeling good rule abiding behavior, you can also be losing so
[Guest]: much power that then the other person is able to completely ignore the rules at some point of time.
[Guest]: And, you know, thankfully, it's not my job to decide where that is.
[Amit Varma]: This is in a sense a classic game theory problem. What do you do? Do you take that step back now to
[Amit Varma]: take the high moral ground? Or do you say I got to play as dirty as the other guy?
[Amit Varma]: Fuck the rules and the institutions.
[Guest]: I mean, again, I think that the smart strategy for the Democratic Party, at least to do,
[Guest]: is to say we're going to play by the rules. But that also means that we're going to crack down
[Guest]: pretty hard on people who are messing with the rules. Right? It's a hardball strategy of its own.
[Guest]: But it's not hardball on the same field or on the same arena as the Republicans.
[Guest]: Yeah. Right. You don't necessarily respond to the same sort of provocations on issues of
[Guest]: identity or race. You do have your own set of things that you want to hit. And again, this is
[Guest]: I'm sure I'm not saying anything that's not in like some Democratic politician's
[Guest]: script book or playbook already. Yeah. Right. But yeah, I mean, I think that even with that
[Guest]: strategy taken, even then, there is something being I'm not familiar enough with the history
[Guest]: of US politics to say whether the Republican or Democratic Party shared sort of a history of
[Guest]: working together on progressive causes. Right. I know they did on like certain sort of pure
[Guest]: economic causes. But if at all, they did, or if there was the potential for such a thing,
[Amit Varma]: I think it's largely gone now. It's pretty much gone. And in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I think the opposition in India faces the same dilemma when it comes to Modi that do we take the
[Amit Varma]: high moral ground or do we get as down and dirty as him and it's something I lament constantly that
[Amit Varma]: the Congress in fact has completely rejected the high moral ground and you know, on social media,
[Amit Varma]: for example, their IT cell is as vicious and bad as a BJP IT cell in many ways. I mean, I've been
[Amit Varma]: targeted by both. And, you know, even the kind of soft Hindutva which they are going for and the
[Amit Varma]: identity politics they're playing, which is, I mean, of course, in India is ubiquitous. And
[Amit Varma]: I disagree with you and say that even in the US, I think identity politics is a massive growing
[Amit Varma]: problem. But leaving that sort of aside before we move on to the international arena and what Trump
[Amit Varma]: is doing there. If I had to ask you to say, outline within the domestic arena, a worst case
[Amit Varma]: scenario and a best case scenario for how the country will look say, two elections from now,
[Amit Varma]: let's say into, you know, 2028. You know, what would your worst case and your best case be?
[Guest]: The worst case is easy. The worst case is that Trump has already won re-election for a second
[Guest]: term and flouts the Constitution to stand for a third. Right? And at that point of time,
[Guest]: the institutions are undermined to the extent that he makes Ivanka vice president and then
[Guest]: dies and she becomes president. I mean, it's, you know, choose your specific nightmare ending,
[Guest]: right? I think that's pretty far fetched. Right? I think that like, a full blown constitutional
[Guest]: crisis is not likely to happen. Because there are not actually that many people who are willing to
[Guest]: serve like the personality cult of Trump. But if it happened, then we'd have to like strike out the
[Guest]: wannabe, right? Like then he would be genuine autocrat, genuine sort of, you know, Central Asian
[Guest]: or like Georgian head of state or something like between crime and government and business.
[Guest]: There's very blurry lines. That would definitely be the worst case because again, this is like the
[Guest]: country that sort of stands as a historical example of like, we can build honest politics
[Guest]: out of a criminal past. New York politics used to be criminal in every sense of the word, right?
[Guest]: Chicago politics used to be criminal in every sense of the word. They've built something better
[Guest]: out of it. So it would be very sad to see it regress. Best case scenario is that he loses in
[Guest]: the next election. And I don't care about graciously but concedes defeat. Doesn't sort of
[Guest]: raise this entire stink around like questing the legitimacy of it. And then one election later is
[Guest]: a non-issue in whatever is being campaigned, right? Like it's almost, you know, irrespective
[Guest]: of what sort of codifying of norms actually happens in between or not. By the time it's
[Guest]: time for whoever's Trump's successor is to stand for re-election, the debate is about them.
[Guest]: 05.05 Right.
[Guest]: 05.05 They're not able to use the plank of like, would you rather have Trump in the election then?
[Guest]: I don't have the information to sort of put a probability estimate on this.
[Guest]: 05.05 Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: 05.05 It's just sort of, this is what I would like to see happen is continuing with democratic
[Guest]: transitions of power. And basically, whatever Trumpism is, it's sort of shoved out of the
[Guest]: marketplace of ideas by better, more compelling things.
[Amit Varma]: 05.15 One would hope so. And now moving on to the, you know, the international domain,
[Amit Varma]: and there is kind of more worrying because in the US, you have all these checks and balances,
[Amit Varma]: like you said, you have a strong judiciary, which has acted at times as an effective check on him.
[Amit Varma]: 05.30 You have all of that happening. I mean, despite the erosion of norms,
[Amit Varma]: institutions are still kind of standing up to some extent. But internationally,
[Amit Varma]: there really aren't that many checks and balances. The US is a huge superpower with huge clout and
[Amit Varma]: every decision that Trump makes, especially with those regarding trade, for example,
[Amit Varma]: affect billions of people, literally.
[Guest]: 05.40 Yeah, so this is where it's hard to find a silver lining, right? The international system
[Guest]: or the international order as we know it in its current form, is only about 70-75 years old.
[Guest]: UN was formed right after World War Two. And the sort of, in that period of time,
[Guest]: it has not been able to develop to the extent that there are strong institutions or independently
[Guest]: enforced rules. There is a field called international law. But there are also people,
[Guest]: notably in the United States and in law schools in the United States, who will even now write
[Guest]: articles arguing that there is actually no such thing called international law,
[Guest]: because there is nobody who can enforce it.
[Guest]: 06.00 And your response to that would be?
[Guest]: 06.00 Just because it doesn't look like domestic law doesn't necessarily mean that it's not law.
[Guest]: 06.00 Right. And equally, as somebody who's trained as a lawyer, I promise you that both
[Guest]: enforcement issues and variation are very much a part of domestic law as well.
[Guest]: 06.00 Right.
[Guest]: 06.00 Right. The last thing that a lawyer will find convincing is if you say, but it's the law.
[Guest]: 06.00 They're like, yeah, that's my job. They're like, that's where my job starts.
[Guest]: Right. But because there isn't necessarily like an overarching institution to sort of be the
[Guest]: 06.00 guarantor of the rules, or to punish bad behaviour, international law is still very much a
[Guest]: system that largely follows the wishes of the most powerful, and military and financially is the
[Guest]: United States. And so this is why Trump is just this grand experiment, right? And I say that
[Guest]: because I don't want to say anything more despairing. You've taken someone who is
[Guest]: fundamentally opposed to the principles of the international system.
[Guest]: 06.00 Right, who's opposed to the idea of long term cooperation, who's opposed to the idea of
[Guest]: treating states as equals, who is opposed to the idea of any sort of constraint on the power of
[Amit Varma]: the powerful, and who sees the world fundamentally in a zero sum way. And you know, where everything
[Amit Varma]: is transactional. And if you win, I must be losing and you know, doesn't understand the
[Guest]: positive sumness of international relations. Absolutely. Well, so Trump is like, he's truly
[Guest]: the worst kind of like zero sum theorist, right? Like, he's a megalomaniac simpleton.
[Guest]: He's a zero sum theorist with the ability to flip over the gaming table.
[Guest]: You know, he's the, I'm out, so I have a bat, I'm taking it.
[Guest]: Exactly. And that's incredibly scary. Because in this case, he really has the ability
[Guest]: to like ruin the game by walking away or by like, as seems more likely, you know,
[Guest]: using it as a weapon as opposed to a sporting implement. So the post World War International
[Guest]: Order was built upon largely the willingness and the impetus and the enlightened self interest of
[Guest]: successive US government leaders. Right? This is not to detract the role that literally everybody
[Guest]: else in the world has played. But to say that the fact that the US was willing to play along was a
[Guest]: necessary condition. Only then were we in a place where it was conducive for these things to
[Guest]: develop. And like Trump's inaugural speech was from now on, it will be America first.
[Guest]: Right. Right. And his, you know, his national security advisor is literally the most famous,
[Guest]: most vehement anti international law American diplomat that there is John Bolton of the
[Guest]: flamboyant mustache, who in his in his time as the US ambassador to the United Nations was
[Amit Varma]: the most hated man in that building. In Bush's time, he was one of Bush's
[Guest]: most hated operatives, which is saying a lot. So he was I mean, he was hated by his own colleagues
[Guest]: in the White House, right. And he was hated by diplomats in the UN. It says something to his
[Guest]: skills as like a bureaucrat and a maneuverer, that he was able to actually keep his position
[Guest]: for that long. And by the way, he's one of those few people that I have not heard accused of,
[Guest]: like, crime or dirty dealings. Right, right. It's there's there's no argument made that the
[Guest]: man is corrupt. Right, like Modi. Bolton genuinely believes that like, anything that detracts from
[Guest]: the sovereignty of the United States is the equivalent of like an attack on the United States.
[Guest]: And he firmly believes that any treaty automatically detracts from the sovereignty of the United
[Guest]: States. And so you have you have like the guy who's saying from now on, it will be America first.
[Guest]: And the guy who's saying treaties are an unacceptable infringement on one team with
[Guest]: the power to do the things that they want to do. And it's a complete misunderstanding of America
[Amit Varma]: first, because America first really means you can only be first through cooperation,
[Amit Varma]: everybody benefits at the same time. And this will actually take America backwards what he's doing.
[Amit Varma]: But the greater problem is it'll take the rest of the world backwards as well. Absolutely. I mean,
[Guest]: this is exactly what Macron said, right. By the way, there is a history to that slogan as well.
[Guest]: To America first. That history relates to sort of like the proto fascist movement within the US
[Guest]: itself. And so it's not like Trump took like an innocent idea and sort of cast his own view on it.
[Guest]: By design or accident, I suspect accident, he tapped into exactly the vein of things that he
[Amit Varma]: wanted to tap into. Both Occam's razor and Hanlon's razor, I'd say probably by accident,
[Amit Varma]: I never ascribe to malice, but you can ascribe to stupidity and he is a simpleton.
[Guest]: But in his case, he's stupid and malignant. And so it's over determined. This was Ben Wittes,
[Guest]: I think, of lawfare on Twitter at some point of time was like, the only thing that tempers
[Guest]: this administration's malignance is its incompetence. Like it's the living version
[Guest]: of sort of like, would you rather have like a bumbling well intentioned person? Sorry,
[Guest]: would you rather have like an ill intentioned bumbling person or like an effective ill intentioned
[Guest]: person? You've got the bumbling ill intentioned person. But I mean, just look at like the list of
[Guest]: treaties that this administration and again, they've been here less than two years. Right.
[Guest]: So this is quite the piece. I was trying to like, total these up on my phone on the way in right.
[Guest]: The Paris Agreement on climate change, literally the only country left out or like one of two
[Guest]: countries left out at this point. I forget which the other country was, but their argument was that
[Guest]: Paris was not stringent enough, which is why they were not signing the Trans Pacific Partnership.
[Guest]: Right, which was basically going to be the biggest trade agreement in the world.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right. And whose entire purpose was to contain China, whose stated goal repeatedly stated while
[Guest]: it was being negotiated was we need to have a counterbalance to China on trade,
[Guest]: which you would think would make it attractive to, but no. Trans Pacific Partnership, NAFTA,
[Guest]: right, the North American Free Trade Agreement, which is considered sort of like the landmark
[Guest]: free trade agreement for, and not to say that NAFTA didn't have negative effects, but for the
[Guest]: most part, those negative effects were exported to Mexico and Canada. They weren't showing up in
[Guest]: the United States. NAFTA has now been renegotiated. It is a new agreement called the US Mexico Canada
[Guest]: Agreement, which, you know, you read reporting from when the negotiation was going on. And one
[Guest]: of the conditions for whatever was supposed to replace NAFTA was that it could not be called
[Guest]: NAFTA. Like this was a thing that the United States diplomats had instructions to make sure
[Guest]: happened, right? Which is like, again, it's sort of like simultaneously stupid and like really petty.
[Guest]: The Korea US agreement was threatened. I think they sort of worked out an arrangement as well.
[Guest]: But again, this is sort of one of those historic agreements that's been around for like 50,
[Guest]: 60 years chugging along. Nobody has a problem with it. Trump somewhere in his head, like still
[Guest]: has a memory of like auto tariff wars or something of like US Japan and US Korea manufacturing wars,
[Guest]: which is so completely in the past, right? Neither of them is competing in that space anymore,
[Guest]: really, right? But he threatened it. And he threatened it while there was like a North Korea,
[Guest]: US South Korea negotiation going on, right? It was just confusing. The universal postal union,
[Guest]: which is literally like 140 plus year old treaty that just has to do with like, you know, like,
[Guest]: stamps. Yeah, like it's literally like, I think it's the it's the thing on which the zip code
[Guest]: system is built. The idea that there will be a numerical code that designates a geographic location.
[Guest]: And here is like sort of the register of them. And like, here is the system,
[Guest]: you know, US you get like code starting with these numbers.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so something basically no freaking consequence.
[Guest]: But Trump believes that something in that treaty is allowing China to like, send freight cheaply
[Guest]: within the United States or whatever. And so he's like, we'll punish them by pulling out of it. And
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, it's just like most egregiously the trade wars he started with China, which of
[Amit Varma]: course, if China reciprocates, and you know, the entire world suffers the consequences of that,
[Guest]: including India, hugely. So I mean, the only reason I haven't put the US China trade war on
[Guest]: this list is because he hasn't literally like broken a treaty to do it. Yeah, but it's just
[Guest]: the same thing. Yeah, yeah, no, I and and I'm very sure that the existence of a treaty would
[Guest]: not have stopped from doing it either. So, you know, yeah, the US China trade war, right, which
[Guest]: is just like the, I mean, it's sort of basic economics, right? Like comparative advantage
[Amit Varma]: theory of trade. I mean, I had an episode on this. I mean, just again, it shows his
[Amit Varma]: zero sum view of the world that he looks as a trade deficit as something that is bad. And no,
[Amit Varma]: fiscal deficits are bad. Trade deficits are perfectly fine. I mean, I run a trade deficit
[Amit Varma]: with my domestic help, you know, I pay them every month, they never pay me, it's perfectly fine,
[Amit Varma]: both parties are benefiting. It's a positive sum game and to sort of impose tariffs and all of that
[Amit Varma]: not just hurts the Chinese, it hurts your own people. It's crazy. I mean, this is the exact
[Guest]: illustration of not just zero sum, but also wrong. Yeah, like it's like, you think you're hurting
[Guest]: China, you're committing a crime on your own people. Indeed, no. And I mean, fundamentally,
[Guest]: the idea that the way that Trump describes a trade deficit is to say they are taking our money,
[Guest]: right, which is kind of true, but they're selling you stuff back for it. Like you're getting the
[Amit Varma]: goods and you're getting value out of that, both parties are benefiting. It's a payment,
[Guest]: it's not theft. And I mean, can you imagine having a conversation with the head of state
[Guest]: or you have to explain this? Yeah. Right. Because like, that's what White House staffers actually
[Guest]: have to do. And clearly, they're not succeeding at it. And, you know, it's unclear if it's because
[Guest]: the man doesn't get the concept, or it's just too invested in this narrative. But the other
[Guest]: area also that we have to touch on when we talk about like dismantling treaties and the trade
[Guest]: wars is in nuclear nonproliferation, right. And so the Iran nuclear deal that he's pulled out of,
[Guest]: which was sort of the, you know, the landmark achievement of nonproliferation of the past
[Guest]: decade. I did an episode for this with Pawan on the Pragati podcast before. Trump basically pulled
[Guest]: out of it on the grounds, not that the deal was not working, but that it was not stopping Iran
[Guest]: from doing other things that he didn't want them to do. Excellent. Right. Which again, sort of
[Guest]: negotiation 101 is that you hive off issues. Yeah. And then you reach agreement on things that you
[Guest]: can and you kick down the road the things that you can't. And then you cooperate on the things
[Guest]: that you do when the trust builds up. And then you're actually able to re-imagine a solution to
[Guest]: the things down the road because now you trust each other more. So it's not that you're kicking
[Guest]: it down the road just because you have nothing better to do at that time. Right. But eventually
[Amit Varma]: it'll become a non-issue if you keep cooperating. Right. I mean, this is the... So tell me something,
[Amit Varma]: let's kind of deviate up and perhaps I'm being simplistic here. And if I am, please correct me.
[Amit Varma]: But let's kind of deviate up into, let's say security implications on the world and economic
[Amit Varma]: implications on the world. Obviously, the two are related and deeply intertwined. But what is the
[Amit Varma]: role that global institutions play in each of these domains? And what are the ways in which
[Guest]: Trump is undermining them? Two big things in security. One, the norm of non-aggression.
[Guest]: You're not supposed to conquer territory by war. Russia broke this in Ukraine. A very simplistic
[Guest]: version is that Trump is going amazingly soft on Russia. Right. Again, apply Occam's razor,
[Guest]: apply Hanlon's razor. A range of explanations emerge. But the fact that territorial aggression
[Guest]: is not being punished and other countries can consider it hugely destabilizing and damaging.
[Guest]: Again, not something that we'll see play out immediately, but potentially down the line,
[Guest]: somebody else who decides that they want to be adventurous has the Russians to point to
[Guest]: and has the fact that the world sort of acquiesced in that. Right. Or has Trump's actions to point
[Guest]: to as proof that the world has acquiesced in it, which is not at all a positive development.
[Guest]: The other is non-proliferation. Right. And non-usage and like steps towards denuclearization,
[Guest]: independent of any specific thing that's been done. Right. Let's just say this is the very
[Guest]: last subject on which you want someone who is zero-sum, short-termist and uninformed by science
[Guest]: to be in charge of things. Right. The potential for disaster is enormous to the extent that actual
[Guest]: proliferation does continue, which is a very real threat because the North Koreans have shown that
[Guest]: they are extremely willing to sell nuclear technology. They're an extremely poor country.
[Guest]: This is one of the most valuable things they can export. If they get the opportunity, they'll try.
[Guest]: Anybody who's willing to buy nuclear science or material from the North Koreans
[Guest]: is almost by definition someone who should not be getting their hands on nuclear materials or
[Guest]: science. And if the US sort of has this blas attitude towards North Korea of like,
[Guest]: no, the president and your leader met and like they worked out a deal and they now they have
[Guest]: a love story or whatever it is, then it's going to be hard to keep track of those things.
[Guest]: So that's my two for security. Economic, I would split into, I mean, look, whatever we have to say
[Guest]: about the trade war is still inadequate, right? Like it's just so harmful on so many levels.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Trump has turned it literally into a negative sum game where all parties suffer.
[Guest]: Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. It's not even zero anymore. It's, you know, those, those like
[Guest]: fantasy novels where like to resolve a duel, each person will like gash themselves with a knife
[Guest]: and the person who gives up first, like loses the duel or whatever. That's what we're playing now.
[Amit Varma]: Right. Yeah. I have one limb left, but you have none.
[Guest]: Monty Python references. I'll bite you. I will.
[Guest]: Independent of independent of the US China anger, right? I don't know what stance Trump has taken
[Guest]: on WTO. But I like I find it very easy to believe that the moment something in the WTO goes against
[Guest]: the US, he'll jump to undermine it as well. And the WTO is the basis of one of the rarest and most
[Guest]: valuable kinds of things in international law, which is an agreed forum for dispute resolution.
[Guest]: So if that loses its effect, right, to be fair, the US is a very spotty track record of actually
[Guest]: complying with WTO rulings and enforcement in the first place. Right. But I mean, this is the
[Guest]: difference between Obama or some other president saying, I'm going to find a loophole that lets me
[Guest]: do this, but that keep the optics right. And they'd still be seen as upholding the role or the
[Guest]: value of the institution. Right. And Trump just sort of being like, they took our money. Yeah,
[Guest]: they were rude to me and whatever. And so we're not going to, oh, sorry, I actually have to
[Guest]: backtrack and add one to security. NATO, the fact that he's like, so averse to NATO that he claims
[Guest]: that NATO is like taking American money so that it doesn't spend on defence, which is not a
[Guest]: implausible interpretation of the collective defence agreement. It's just that that agreement
[Guest]: doesn't really mean that European countries have to pay money to the United States, right, to
[Guest]: loop back to where we started. It's not that kind of protection racket. And Trump had to be cornered
[Guest]: into saying something that should be just like, like a casual statement for any US president,
[Guest]: which is, we believe in Article 5 of the NATO treaty, which is the assurance of mutual self
[Guest]: defence. And he resists it, he fights every time because he doesn't want to say I'm willing to
[Guest]: come to the defence of, in fact, he says the opposite. He's like, why should I care if like
[Guest]: X country in Europe is being targeted? Right. And like, of course, it's not about X country. It's
[Guest]: about the value of the existence of this alliance. And to be fair, he's been very consistent,
[Amit Varma]: Trump, the president has been consistent to Trump, the campaigner, he used to say pretty
[Guest]: much the same kind of nonsense on the campaign trail. Right. He did target NATO even while
[Guest]: campaigning on exactly these grounds. The sad thing is that like he's been corrected multiple
[Guest]: times on this, right. And again, he's not willing to give up his pet narrative on it. But so on
[Guest]: economy, China trade war, WTO, migration, right? Like we should not lose track of the fact that
[Guest]: one of the major ways that global flows happen and that value moves around the world is through
[Guest]: people. Right. And Trump is clearly trying to build Fortress America that like people cannot
[Guest]: actually get into that multiple levels, whether that's like asylum and refugee policy, whether
[Guest]: that's like labor migration, whether it's migration by skilled workers, whatever. And again, if he
[Guest]: just does it in the United States, arguably, like the people who could have gone to the United
[Guest]: States lose out, obviously, the United States itself also loses out. The danger is that other
[Guest]: countries either retaliate or take it as a precedent, right, which is not implausible at all,
[Guest]: right. When he when he first brought those travel bans, one of the things that he said was these
[Guest]: will apply even to dual citizens who have one of their citizenships from these countries. But if
[Guest]: the other citizenship is France or the UK or something, I mean, technically under like the
[Guest]: letter of the diplomatic relations or the consular relations treaties, these are subjects of
[Guest]: reciprocity. And if you're not allowing someone who's a French citizen into the country, you know,
[Guest]: in theory, the French are supposed to like suspend access for US citizens into France.
[Guest]: Right. The French will obviously make a decision about whether they want to do this or not.
[Amit Varma]: And they obviously won't because they're not led by a madman yet.
[Guest]: Right. But you can see this starting to, not that we're at the situation where there really is like
[Guest]: global free movement of people, but there is at least global regulated movement of people.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And you can see this sort of leading to a situation where like bits of that become islands
[Guest]: that don't speak to each other.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And we move backwards, like we're moving backwards on trade, we move backwards on.
[Guest]: So if we regress on migration as well, then that's another
[Guest]: vector of the creation of value and global flows that drops.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, I was going to ask you about the worst case scenario and the best case scenario
[Amit Varma]: in the international domain. But I think the worst case scenario is fairly obvious,
[Amit Varma]: is nuclear war and we all get wiped out. Are there less worse?
[Guest]: Oh, so I don't think that interstate nuclear war is actually sort of likely, right?
[Unknown]: What is your worst case?
[Guest]: You know, it sort of strains credibility, but I have to, I mean, I have to believe that
[Guest]: a country that, well, many countries that currently have nuclear weapons,
[Guest]: arguably even including Russia, might make the enlightened choice to
[Guest]: absorb a nuclear strike and not retaliate.
[Guest]: Right? Like, there's again, there's really great game theory work on this on sort of like,
[Guest]: what is your decision tree like after you've faced the first strike?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but how does sort of game theory take into account an irrational fool like Trump?
[Guest]: I mean, correct. No, that's why I said many, including even maybe Russia, but not the United.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, I'd say Putin is much more rational than Trump for that matter.
[Guest]: At least in affairs like this.
[Guest]: Much more evil, but much more rational.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, one believes he's the other, right? He's the evil competent one.
[Guest]: Yeah. No, my worst case in the nuclear space has to do with
[Guest]: proliferation to like non-state or rogue actors, which I think just like slips under the radar,
[Guest]: because the US is not doing the same good job of like, global coalition
[Amit Varma]: building and enforcement that it does.
[Amit Varma]: So like they set off a dirty nuke in Bombay and you and I are wiped out and the Delhi people
[Amit Varma]: are laughing and saying, hey, you said our air was polluted.
[Guest]: That would be terrible. The worst part of that would be the joke. But yes, the joke is terrible.
[Guest]: Best case again, I think, is that especially European leaders sort of lead a concerted effort
[Guest]: to say, since we know that these are the kinds of stresses and like variations that we have to deal
[Guest]: with, let's invest in building sort of more robust, more codified things against this possibility.
[Guest]: This is sort of not let a good crisis go to waste.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And actually improve the robustness of your institutions in the process.
[Amit Varma]: And sort of to move on from Trump right at the end of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Trump isn't an isolated phenomenon in the sense that there are populists all over.
[Amit Varma]: And we do have a populist authoritarian in power right now in India. But Trump is very
[Amit Varma]: unusual in the sense that, you know, Narendra Modi at least is a conventional politician who's
[Amit Varma]: come up in politics for, you know, all those decades. And you could say that in certain ways,
[Amit Varma]: he's a rational player. He's responding to political incentives and so on. Trump was a
[Amit Varma]: pure freak of nature who is completely irrational, who doesn't lie as much as he bullshits, to use
[Amit Varma]: Harry Frank's famous phrasing of it. Is there a threat for you in that, for example, we could
[Amit Varma]: one day miss Modi, that there could be a leader in charge who is more like Trump, less rational,
[Amit Varma]: less rational, or more willing to play to whatever extremes seem to work at the moment?
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, is there a cautionary tale there? Or is there a lesson to be learned about,
[Amit Varma]: say, India's rules and institutions, and how good they are or how weak they are?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. Not even to single out India, right? Globally, there is a trend of established
[Guest]: political parties usually growing more extreme, right? More reactionary elements sort of capturing
[Guest]: or whatever, what do you want to call them? More purist elements, capturing power within the party.
[Amit Varma]: Do you have any thoughts on why that is? Because typically, like in public choice theory,
[Amit Varma]: what you learn is you learn the medium voter theorem, which is basically that even in the US,
[Amit Varma]: you have the Democratic and the Republican Party, every election in the primaries,
[Amit Varma]: they'll go towards the extremes to win the primary votes of the committed guys.
[Amit Varma]: But in the general election, they'll immediately swing towards the middle. And you've seen that
[Amit Varma]: trend changing, where more and more, the voters themselves tend to swing to the extremes. And
[Amit Varma]: that brings a guy like Trump into power. And maybe Bernie Sanders would have given on the other
[Amit Varma]: extreme would have given him a tougher fight than Hillary Clinton. And we don't know. So why does
[Guest]: the median voter theorem no longer work? Two or three things I can think of.
[Guest]: One, as with a lot of other theorizing in, especially in public choice economics, right?
[Guest]: We should not assume perfect information or even unmanipulated flow of information.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, there's rational ignorance and so on.
[Guest]: There's one set of issues around basically,
[Guest]: who is able to get information out there, who is able to get the narrative out there.
[Guest]: Trump visibly, I mean, you if nothing else, you have to give him credit for completely hijacking
[Guest]: the media's decision making cycle. Right. And for doing that masterfully. Yeah. Right.
[Amit Varma]: He perhaps unintentionally again.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, that's one where I think he knew the rules of that game. And like,
[Guest]: he knew how to spin them to his favor. Right.
[Amit Varma]: So one of his metrics was how much news I get, how much, you know, airtime I get.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I mean, he I mean, he's confessed in like other speeches since that, like,
[Guest]: he basically decided what he would make his slogans based on what the crowd was responding to.
[Guest]: Right. So one to do with flow of information and media, one to do with especially in democracies.
[Amit Varma]: All of which are forever held, though they've held over the last few decades,
[Amit Varma]: imperfect information, rational ignorance, the tendency to prefer simple narratives over complex
[Amit Varma]: ones. And yet the median voter theorem held and now it suddenly doesn't. Now it's profitable for
[Amit Varma]: you to go to the extremes in the general elections.
[Guest]: So I suspect and I'm not very well read in this. So I sort of have to caveat. But I suspect that
[Guest]: the development from earlier is the fact that the sources of information themselves have fragmented
[Guest]: and tribalized. And that you're no longer arguing over what is a good response to an agreed reality.
[Guest]: Right. You're arguing over like, a reality that itself is partisanly constructed.
[Guest]: Right. And, you know, might not bear all but the most passing resemblance to
[Guest]: what the other person sees. Which I think would start leaning you towards greater
[Unknown]: Polarization. Polarization, exactly.
[Guest]: There's an entire set of theories, at least within the US around what kind of voters are
[Guest]: more likely to actually go out and vote or not. And the fact that like, you know, it's
[Guest]: the extremes that actually vote on either side or on each side of how many ever sided a distribution
[Guest]: this is. And that the median actually tends to sort of assume that they don't have much
[Guest]: of a swing capacity and not. That's very well put. And I've argued before
[Amit Varma]: in columns that social media has actually exacerbated this tribalism and polarization
[Amit Varma]: and this creation of alternative narratives. I may have taken a lot of your time today. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, thanks so much for your patience. And thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the scene in the unseen. I learned a lot from you and I
[Amit Varma]: hope you'll come back soon. I would love to be back. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Unknown]: Thank you.